---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/archive/y1/y1-t1/y1-t1-legal-methods/readings/lm-10-01-lok-sabha-government-bills-legislative-process/"}
---

From Lok Sabha website

- Basic function of Parliament — to make laws, introduced in the form of Bills.
- A Bill is simply a draft of a statute.
- Can be introduced by a Minister (Government Bill) or a member of Parliament who is not a Minister (Private Bill).
- Must go through three readings in each House of Parliament, passed by both Houses and receive the President's assent to become the law.

Readings of the Bill
1. First reading
	- Motion to introduce a Bill,
	- or to review a Bill already passed by the other House of Parliament. 
2. Second reading
	- First stage: discussion on principles of the Bill.
	- Second stage: clause by clause examination of the Bill.
3. Third reading
	- Discussion on the motion of passing the Bill. 

Standing Committees
- They examine Bills introduced in either House and make reports. 
- They can make recommendations, and these reports have persuasive power.
- If the government wishes to accept these recommendations, the Bill can be amended or reintroduced with the changes.

Select or Joint Committees
- Considers the Bill clause-by-clause.
- Can move amendments to various clauses.
- Money Bills cannot be referred to a Joint Committee.

Restriction on the Introduction of Certain Categories of Bills in the Rajya Sabha
- Money Bills and any Bills relating to subclauses (a) to (f) of Article 110 cannot be introduced in the Rajya Sabha. 
- Required to return a Money Bill within 14 days of receiving it. 
	- If not returned within 14 days, the Bill automatically passes in both Houses.
- Lok Sabha is under no obligation to accept any suggestions made by Rajya Sabha (for Money Bills).

Constitutional Amendments
- Simple majority vote applies, when not less than 2/3rds of the members of each House are present and voting. 

Joint Sitting
- Any Bill (other than Money Bills and Constitutional Amendments) when rejected by one House, after more than 6 months, the President can summon both Houses to meet in a Joint Sitting. 

President's Assent
- Required to turn a Bill into an Act, after it is passed by both Houses. 
- If not a Money Bill, the President may:
	- Give assent
	- Withhold assent
	- Return the bill for reconsideration.
- Money Bills: may
	- Give assent
	- Withhold assent
	- Cannot return for reconsideration.
- Constitutional Amendments:
	- Bound to give assent when passed by special majority and ratified by a specific number of State legislatures.