---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/archive/y1/y1-t1/y1-t1-legal-methods/readings/lm-25-01-galanter-the-aborted-restoration-of-indigenous-law-in-india/"}
---

Comparative Studies in Society and History

- Traditional law has been almost completely removed from the Indian legal system. 
- Dharmasastra is no longer part of the law, and is mixed with common-law and personal laws, the same goes for Muslim law.

Part 1: Failure to replace the current legal system with indigenous law
- Unsuitability of British law in India: the common people could not relate to the alien system and the widely accepted methods of settling disputes began to erode.
- Courts were seen as a form of British control and there was a push for Indigenous tribunals.
- Gandhi's wish to create a decentralized republic based on village autonomy was rejected, and only the Panchayat system was kept. 
- After the Constitution came into force, there were again discussions for a complete overhaul of the legal system, since it was slow and expensive. 
- Many criticisms of procedural law: court administration, rules of evidence, adversarial system, penalties, etc.
- Legal professionals disagreed — they believed the system had many defects, but it was not due to the foreign nature of the system. 
- Law Commission report: if the systems of the past had been given a chance to develop, they would be very similar to today's system — and without this system, it seems impossible to achieve the goals of the Constitution. 
	- Stated that traditional law would find it impossible to cope with the complexities of Modern law. 
	- Did allow the panchayat system to settle petty matters in a simplified manner. 

- Judicial panchayats: elected by majority vote, have a fixed number of members, give judgements through majority vote rather than unanimity, expected to follow the laws of the State. 
	- Hence, strongly criticized by judges and other legal professionals. 
	- Exclusion of lawyers in certain cases held unconstitutional by SC.
- Struggles: independence from parties to a case, enforcing their decree, deciding cases as fast as they thought they would. 
- Administrative panchayats often work to disseminate national/central policy than create their own local policy.
- This is called dual modernization by Paul Brass, the containment of tradition as modernization and the extension of modernization as tradition. 

Part 2: Explaining this failure and implications for the study of comparative legal institutions
Why has the system failed?
1. Support from elite for the present legal system: they depended on the legal system for their living and status, and were hence staunch opponents of fundamental reform. The support base for the traditionalist movement was also unorganized, fragmented and never properly represented — no schools to produce them and lacked qualifications as well.
2. Proponents for a traditional system had no alternative: you cannot lobby for the replacement of a system without having a replacement ready. 
	- Replacements such as Dharmasastra would go against the core values of the Constitution and the Indian Republic (secularism and equality). It was only a symbolic alternative, with no practical application. 
	- Local customary law would not be able to deal with nationwide projects.
	- A synthesis of Indian and Western was hard to even depict, let alone set up and administer.
3. There was no grievance that greatly affected the people and made them want to mobilize to solve the problem. 

Mainly because: this legal system has become 'indigenous' to Indians. 
- After centuries of British rule under British law, Indian judges began evolving legal principles that would best suit the Indian public. 
- This carried over even after Independence and the constitution, through the Constituent Assembly and the lawyers.
- Villagers are also accommodated within the new legal system, and are shown to be "bi-legal": using both traditional and official law. 
- The displacement of indigenous law does not mean indigenous values and concerns will disappear, they are simply being pursued and accommodated within the official legal system. 