---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/y1-t1-legal-methods/readings/lm-21-01-stein-roman-law-common-law-and-civil-law/"}
---

(1591-1604)

==Roman Law and Common Law==
Similarities: 
- Both built up through discussion and decision of cases, ie law was discovered rather than given ([[Y1 T1 Legal Methods/READINGS/LM4.01 Loughlin, Sword and Scales - An Examination of the Relationship between Law and Politics\|LM4.01 Loughlin, Sword and Scales - An Examination of the Relationship between Law and Politics]]: Law as custom rather than law as command).
	- This led to the creation of narrow rules and constant revision of these rules through future debates (for the Romans). 
	- Not universal: Athens viewed law as a product of legislation. 

- Legal discussion focused more on remedies than rules.
	- A plaintiff could only bring a case forward if they have a document with a claim (formula given by praetor in Rome, writ given by Chancellor in England).
	- This led to State control over legal discussion in courts.

- Procedure:
	- Identifying the legal issue
		- Needed to be made understandable for the laymen to decide.
	- Proof and decision of the issue in favor of one of the parties.
		- The laymen (iudex or jury) have the final say in deciding — no appeals.

- Nature of remedy:
	- In most cases, the only remedy available was money damages.
	- This is because laymen decided a case, and their office ceased to exist once they gave their verdict.
	- Once the need arose for other forms of remedy, the responsibility fell on the magistrate.

- Two bodies of law:
	- Traditional rules (rigid, hard to change).
	- Flexible set of rules based on fairness and justice (ius honorarium of praetor, equity of Chancellor).
	- ROME: both sets administered by praetor, recognized as ordinary and extraordinary jurisdiction.
	- ENGLAND: administered by separate courts.

==Civil Law and Common Law==
- Modern civil law systems actually derive from post-classical Roman law, hence are very different from Roman law. 

Features of Modern Civil Law:
- Codified: the system of law is coherent and a product of legislation. 
	- A code wipes the slate clean + new beginning: Justinian, who created the Corpus Iuris, a code of ancient Roman law.
- Distinction between private law and public law. 
	- Roman law texts had the distinction between ius publicum and ius privatum, but they did not have two separate bodies of law, unlike civil systems today.
	- Common law has no such distinction, since it applies to both the government and citizens and is followed by the same courts.
- Finality of the written law:
	- The usage of deductive reasoning and the application of one rule to a case (like a syllogism) gives the illusion of certainty and there being a correct answer.
	- Judges rarely ever give dissenting opinions, and their judgements are considered the opinion of the whole court. 
	- In common law, no rule is final. Anything can be contested, since what is said is not final, but what is decided is the rule. 
- Relationship between judges and academic commentators:
	- Judges often defer to the opinion of academic commentators of law, and hide behind the decisions of the court since all they have to do is apply the rules. 
- Substantive law and procedure:
	- There is a sharp distinction between the two, almost fully separated.
	- Due to the influence of the humanist jurists of the 16th century, such as Hugo Donellus. 
	- According to them, substantive law is a set of subjective rights and procedural law is the mechanism for enforcing those rights. 

Civil law procedure and common law procedure
- Inquisitorial procedure of civil law:
	- Derived from the cognitio procedure of Roman law, which replaced the formulary system. 
		- Professional magistrates dealt with the case, no laymen.
	- Copied by the Church and then other secular authorities — by then, jury system was established in England.
	- Series of meetings and written communications between the parties to gather evidence. Can suggest questions, but the judge formally puts the questions. 
	- Adjournment to gather more evidence always possible, judge is there to throw light on all parts of the case. 

- Adversarial procedure of common law
	- Each party confronts each other on a fixed day in public, with witnesses and evidence. They control what issues are raised.
	- The judge is simply a referee to ensure fairness and does not ask any questions. Then, they sum up evidence and relevant rules of law. 
- Made so that illiterate laymen can also give judgement. 

Effects of the difference of procedure:
- Relationship between fact and law: the jury and iudex never had to justify their decisions, since the number of facts was limited by the area of the dispute decided by the writs. Questions of fact often turn into questions of law. 
	- For a civil lawyer, many issues would be a mere question of fact.
- Presentation of logic:
	- Common lawyers begin with the facts and then move on to legal issues and which laws/precedents apply.
	- A civil lawyer will begin with the relevant statutes and then apply them to the case.
- Attitude toward evidence:
	- Common law has a preference for publicity of evidence, and oral testimony over written proof.
		- Legal documents are generally valid if they have witnesses and signatures, can be challenged by oral testimony.
	- Civil law says that a witness might be more comfortable telling the truth before a judge in private, preference for written proof over oral testimony. 
		- Notaries are documents that "prove themselves".